I began exploring this the from the
first things I looked at who was the
history of money itself these things oh
okay what is it debt a debt is
essentially a promise which you can
phrase in exactly quantifiable terms any
coins you can quantify it it's
impersonal um by all that because it's
impersonal it's transferable so you know
if I promise you that it will meet you
at five o'clock you can't actually
transfer that to someone else normally
speaking because in some circumstances
you could but a promise which is
quantifiable I promise you give you
exactly this amount of things you
actually can turn over to someone else
and in a way that according to many
theories that's what money actually is
is a transferable promise you render a
certain amount of goods
one of the great questions is how that
comes about why they need to quantify
promises happens or to quantify them
precisely and we've had a story about
why this happens let you read in your
basic economic 101 textbook actually
invented by Adam Smith in 1776 the
wealth of tanks and this is the first
time you see someone really making the
argument in detail and it continues to
be the story that everybody knows and
learns they pick up somewhere or another
that becomes common sense it's in here
as an anthropologist I must say that I
have a kind of a pet peeve at most
respect because well it's a professional
pet peeve on the part of anthropologists
because this story was told you know it
over 200 years ago almost immediately we
started going out in the world trying to
find examples of people who do it and we
couldn't it's not true he never changed
the decks books we just can't get them
to come over with different story but
all right here's the story you've all
heard it before once upon a time there
people lived in villages and they used
to swap things you know there was a
barter say I wanted somebody's cow well
I said all right hey I need a cow tell
you what I'll give you 30 chickens for
that cow and the guy's like wow no 30 is
not much of 40 chickens 45 all right so
you know so so you come to some sort of
arrangement
swap go home but the problem is maybe
the guy doesn't want checkers maybe you
don't happen to have anything he wants
right now what happens well you can't
make a deal right so the only way out of
this problem is have pops up more and
more over time is to settle on something
that everybody usually wants like gold
for some reason shiny metal but it's
kind of handy and pretty and and it's a
virtuous circle the moment you start
using it as a general equivalent
everybody needs it all the time it turns
into money so barter is inconvenient you
get money government gets involved and
starts stamping the stuff your uniform
weights and quality all that started
cheating all the time and debasing the
currency these governments are bad in
this version gradually you have bent
credit systems and it's an evolutionary
series barter money credit securitized
derivatives and whatnot are just sort of
the last link of the chain all is
logically alright so that's the story as
I say the big there's one big problem
you know we've been scouring the world
for over 200 years now and we have never
found a single community where everyday
transactions take the form of I'll give
you 40 chickens for that cow it's they
don't exist and Adam Smith himself had
no way to know this he was a speculating
but now we do and they keep on telling
the story I mean if you look at
contemporary economic textbooks the old
ones used to say well primitive people
do this you know and now that they kind
of know it's not true they they they
don't want to stop so instead they say
well imagine you didn't have money what
would you have to do how would you get
breakfast well you'd have to barter
wouldn't you and they told a story as a
kind of parable which is basically what
it is um there's an obvious reason if
you think about it there's obvious
problem with a story why it wouldn't
happen which is you know you're taking a
Neolithic village you're a bunch of
people who are neighbors and you are
assuming that they will only deal with
each other with what you know economists
like to call the spot trade here I'm
gonna give you this you're gonna give me
that we walk away but of course why
would they do that right
they're neighbors if the guy doesn't
want my chickens he knows I'm gonna have
something he wants because I'm his
neighbor in fact it's rather nice to
have your neighbor in your dad it's
useful for all sorts of things so you
know even if you take this imaginary
scenario here there's these two guys in
a Neolithic village one wants a cow what
would really happen right here you have
this situation so I want to count I go
up I say wow that is one magnificent
cows really beautiful cow and you got
there so the guy you know there's only
one thing you can do he says oh you want
the cow well please take the cow it's a
really stupid cow but you know if you
like it you should really have it no no
don't even think about giving anything
back it's a gift of course we were
neighbors we love each other just take
the cow um now he owes you want and and
everybody knows that nobody will say it
but what is the owe you something
roughly like a cow and that's what you
get in communities like this you get
this sort of rank system of types of
things so a cow a canoe a very nice
necklace or roughly the same if you give
one back for the other um or you know
it's not necessarily that because you
could give something back to him or he
could just show up because you know you
owe him one and he could just say well
wow that's a beautiful necklace you have
on or you could say you know my son is
deeply in love with your daughter you
know it could be a lot of things and
there's necessarily a material good
really need help something so but you
have this sort of quantified rank system
and you know there's all sorts of ways
you can head it off you can play games
you could like saying like he'd haven't
knowing that guy a cow I'm oh I know I
just got a whole bunch of yams I'll give
them to him I'll be off the hook and you
know they'll be like oh yeah it was
great thanks bud you know so he might
mock you as a cheapskate which is a
devastating thing in a small community
but here's the thing he's very unlikely
to come up with a mathematical formula
for exactly how cheap he thinks you were
right and that's the problem how do you
get from like a cow is roughly like this
to 27 yams equals one cow but not three
how many
chickens equals a cow in the barter
story there's there's a mechanism but
you know if there's this sort of rough
credit system was what you'd actually
have and what you actually do observe in
in places about money well how does that
turn into something where you can figure
out exact proportion equivalents
the answer to that seems to be when
somebody's very angry now when people
are being nice to each other there's
really no need to calculate but
occasionally it will happen that people
violence ensues say I am mocking someone
for giving me these yams and he's drunk
I'm drunk of violence ensues somebody's
ear gets cut off well then there's
numbers very often it is the case that
even in places where you don't have
markets for goods you do have incredibly
elaborate series of fines and penalties
for you know damaged limbs if you lose a
finger it's worth this much if you lose
a thumb it's worth that much it was an i
if there's a gash like this this large
and we'll measure the gash on how many
you know chickens or peppers or um
silver plates or whatever it might be of
it what they call the barbarian law
codes and seem like every society an
early medieval Europe who wrote out the
schedule of fines like this and some of
them are incredibly detailed the early
Welsh and Irish ones are especially
interesting because we know they didn't
have markets you couldn't buy or sell
things most things but they did have
prices on everything
in fact they specify the exact value of
every single object likely to be found
in a person's house ranging from the
silverware to the roof beams everything
the curtains why because you will end up
in you know a situation often where the
law says you only twenty seven heifers
or this means war
swords are pulled people are not willing
to compromise you know you killed my
brothers you insulted my mother whatever
it might be
you need to pay penalties and you don't
have heifers well then you actually need
to figure out exactly what's equivalent
to what so in those circumstances and in
legal situations particularly where
there's a danger
feud or outbreak of violence in fact
people do need to quantify and it seems
like that's the first circumstance where
you have something like money emerging
that Association then of money and
violence is a constant and history of
money itself remember we have this
paradigm
first there is barter then there's money
then it comes credit and that's wrong
not only is it wrong it's actually
backwards credit comes first
somehow or other by the time the sort of
curtain comes up around 3,500 BC in
Mesopotamia you already have very
elaborate credit systems actually the
very first document we have which talks
about interest rates is a political
document by a king named a Sumerian king
who's complaining about his neighbor is
like occupying a stretch of territory
which is rightfully his and he says well
you know they've been occupying this
land for 20 years we calculate the rent
we would have charged them had they been
renting the same land and then add a
compounded interest rate I you know that
I calculated that they would actually
owe us you know thirteen trillion
shekels or you know whatever some
insanely something that no one could
possibly pay obviously this means war so
know you've already got compounded
interest rates and so forth going on in
the very very first records that we have
people have expense accounts bar cabs it
seems like almost all everyday
transactions are on credit and the
evidence for that is scales because they
were denominating debts and silver but
they didn't actually make scales
accurate enough to weigh out the tiny
amounts of silver that would have been
required to buy like a shirt or a hammer
or something like that in a marketplace
I mean they had the technology to do so
they just didn't bother so clearly
people weren't actually using silver to
buy this stuff they were they were
running up a tab alright so you've got
this sumerian situation with the same
king you know what he does after he
declares war on lagasse or the rival
place wins and what does he do after
that if he declares a debt cancellation
because it seemed for everybody in the
kingdom because it seems that the
problem you have these credit systems
money is basically
a set of io u--'s denominated and sulfur
or the silver unless you're dealin
stealing alerts transactions rarely
actually changes hands um the problem
isn't bad years people fall into doubt
he's also the silver and gray nor fixed
in relation to each other that's what
money actually is but that's a pretty
problem if you you know that there's a
bad harvest the price doesn't go up your
stock the farmers fall terribly into
debt as a result people start taking
with their flocks taking away their
fields taking away members of their
family debt peonage becomes a huge
phenomena they start running away
joining Nomad bands outside the city
society seems to be breaking down so
Kings will normally come in and sort of
declare a clean slate
alright commercial that's gonna stay on
the books usually but consumer debt will
wipe them out and start over again this
becomes a habit and becomes obsessed
amortized in the biblical jubilee every
seven to forty nine years depending on
your eating debts are wiped out
everybody gets to go home
in fact the first recorded word for
freedom in any human language is the
Sumerian word amar ghee which literally
means return to mother because that's
what happens they declared debt
cancellation all the debt peons get to
go home so this virtual money system
comes first which is always very
entertaining because people have this
tendency to write about virtual money as
a new phenomena we're in this brave new
world actually its original form of
money Queens come later
order incidentally tends to only really
show up when you have people who are
used to using money but actually can't
get their hands on any so you do have
documented places where people do say
I'll give you twenty chickens for that
cow but it and in almost every case it's
something like you know Russia in the
90s where the economy falls apart or the
money to supply vanishes and people are
trying to carry on as if they had money
without money or in a prison you know
they turned the cigarettes into money
because are all used to using with me
now here's the interesting thing
coins are invented
nearly simultaneously it happens first
in Lydia in the eastern Mediterranean
but shortly thereafter at least in broad
historical terms it happens in the
Ganges plain in northern India and in
the plains of northern China I can't use
Valium sir and in every case through
different physical techniques one case
stamped on cake is cast but the social
situation seems to be the same which is
that money in the physical science
currency is actually invented to pay
soldiers and it makes perfect sense if
you think about it because you know gold
and silver or what money is denominated
in wear then you can use it for exchange
but it just isn't usually done but
soldiers are exactly the sort of people
who are most likely to be doing this
first of all you know from the
perspective of a soldier you know gold
and silver has a huge advantage over a
credit arrangement because you can't
actually steal a credit arrangement you
run off of it on the other hand cold and
silver it's kind of your equivalent of
the the suitcase full of $100 bills
nobody knows where it's from nobody asks
anybody will take it
so for soldiers that's very nice you can
also melt it down with it divide it up
into small portions so soldiers are
likely to be carrying around loot and
second of all if you have elaborate
credit arrangements as a major way of
transacting well you know a heavily
armed guy who's just passing through is
probably the person you'd least like to
extend a credit to if you can possibly
avoid it if he's carrying around little
bits of gold and silver and long you
know good
so cash markets insofar as they seem to
first emerge will tend to emerge right
around wherever armies are parked or
where they have recently looted things
and are you know trying to get rid of
the little bits of gold and silver and
acquire the wine women song and various
other things that they like um
governments very quickly get in on the
deal and in fact one interesting thing
is by the Adam Smith account if if money
just sort of emerges from the need to
get over the inconveniences of order
well it would be very hard to understand
why governments demanded taxes and money
it might seem self-evident but the
moment you think about it is it because
because if gold and silver just money
well why not just grab the gold and
silver mines and in fact governments
would do that I mean ancient kings would
normally grab the gold and silver mines
in theory you have all the gold and
silver you want you got all the money
why would you then take the stuff stamp
your picture on it give it to people and
say okay everybody in the kingdom has to
give me one of these back again things
but it's kind of odd but it makes
perfect sense if you're trying to feed
an army you know here you have this army
of a hundred thousand people there
sitting town on the border well how are
you gonna get food to them under ancient
conditions unless serve next to the
ocean where it's easy relatively easy to
move stuff around it's extremely
difficult to move around large amounts
of grain they're gonna eat everything
within walking distance in a matter of
weeks so what are you gonna do either
you have to employ you know another
hundred thousand people just bringing
them stuff or you can give them all tiny
little pieces of metal with your picture
on it and say okay everybody in the
kingdom has to give me one back voila
you've just employed your entire
population you know find getting
soldiers things they want and that's
essentially what taxation systems have
done throughout world history I mean
colonial empires did this very very
self-conscious like of Madagascar where
I was first thing the French did they
said okay we've just conquered you that
was very expensive outfitting an army or
you're going to have to pay us back for
the cost of having conquered you we will
issue paper money and you will have to
give you know ten of those back to us
every year no it was a way of creating
market
somehow or another you're gonna have any
other they actually called it the you
know moralizing tax to teach people the
value of work so money and taxes have
been used throughout the centuries as
ways of creating markets which is very
interesting because we have this
assumption that markets and governments
and particularly war making governments
are opposed principles
and that political choice for the last
century or so has largely revolved
around which one we're gonna slant to
are we gonna go more on the government
side more in the market side those are
the two sort of logical union
possibilities and we're since people
like Herbert Spencer rather than early
19th century we've always assumed
there's an opposition between these
things historically in fact no markets
tend to be created by governments as a
side effect of military operations they
sometimes take on a life of their own
but you know the origins are very
closely linked so to go back to the the
these periods of history so you have
this period first period of virtual
money quaint urges invented around 600
BC called jasper is the the german
existential philosopher according the
phrase the axial age for this period and
he pointed out to almost all major
schools both of world philosophy and the
great world religions crop up within a
relatively short period of time if you
extend it from 600 BC to 600 AD it's
exactly it happening exactly the times
and places were they invent coinage
uncanny it's even in the same city so in
Greece maile toast which is a place
where they first Greek city where
they're using coins and everyday
transactions is where they invent Greek
philosophy at exactly the same time in
China it happens in nd it happens the
world religions arise or world religions
arise largely as peace movements against
these empires that are using the coins
and people have talked about axial Ages
as being characterized by by a military
coinage slavery complex actually they
say you know what reclaim expel throw in
slavery because chattel slavery which is
a major institution either before or
after an Indian and Chinese history for
example becomes a really big just in
this little slice of time um people are
yet yet take these standing armies they
pay them in cash Alexander's army for
example I think it took half a ton of
silver a day to pay the army where did
they get the sulphur well the armies
would besiege cities take lots of
prisoners and slaves them send them to
the mines and they they make more metal
to feed the army again
so it became this giant cycle so coins
are actually found pretty much where
armies are throughout the ancient world
in Rome it was in Italy with 90% of all
finds I mean Roman coins are in Italy
and along the border or the armies were
stationed all right so axial age you
have this rise of world religions they
start as peace movements there's this
kind of mutual division of social
territory in a way because before that
you don't really have impersonal markers
you have credit markets when you have
the impersonal markets based on cash the
idea is well you know it's almost like
saying well here's a space where we'll
just think about material goods and
getting as much of them for yourself as
possible and it almost makes sense that
somebody if you do that someone else
will say all right here's the space
we'll call it religion where we think
about why material things are not
important and why it's better to give
them to receive and charity and things
like that always crop up as an idea that
never really existed before as a
conception and even history exactly the
same places you get these impersonal
markets well as part of these religions
so you get that but but gradually the
empires come to a crisis they start
crumbling they adopt the world religions
and diffusion ISM in China
Ashok adopts Buddhism Constantine goes
for Christianity at exactly the moment
the Empire starting to fall apart
it doesn't really work empires dissolve
and you get the Middle Ages where once
the armies standing armies dissolve all
the gold and silver basically gets put
back in churches and monasteries people
go back to credit systems and the world
religions take over the regulation of
these large elaborate credit systems and
so for example in the Middle East you
know checks are invented and widely used
already in Basra around eight or nine
hundred people were reporting a majority
of transactions in the marketplace or by
check check is actually an Arabic
meaning check
yeah I always like to point out to
people when they talk about financial
globalization as if this is somehow a
new phenomena like think about the terms
cash and checks the cash or track like
cheque is an arab board meaning check
and cash well it's a double etymology
but one of them apparently is originally
a Tamil word for Chinese money how did
that happen
so alright so you have this world where
where people are going back to use of
credit in in you know we say Oh in the
Middle Ages the Europe reverted to
barter
not sure in fact if you look at the
records that they're not bartering
things they're actually using money but
they're using money that doesn't
physically exist so they're still using
Roman currency and denominating
everything in Roman currency until
constant Charlemagne and then they're
using Carolinian currency but the
Carolingian currency only actually
exists for maybe 20 years and some of it
doesn't exist at all so like pounds
shillings and pence originally come from
Charlemagne system he never actually
made pounds he never got around to it
but they were using it to measure things
and they actually called this imaginary
money
so whatever the king was actually
putting out that was one thing but you
had this sort of ideal system which
spanned Europe everybody knew what it
was and so you could trade and do it on
the basis of this money that didn't
actually exist um and they actually even
had a phenomena they used to call cryin
up or crying down the currency so a king
could say alright whatever we're using
right now it used to be 17 of these
pennies were chillin I'm gonna change it
now to be 13 you know if he could
inflate the currency if he was in dad or
if he wanted to raise taxes he'd love it
and so he just rearranged whatever the
currency was being used which was only
used for occasionally things because
again most transactions were on credit
in relation to - or they can recall it
and in the Kings zooms having said okay
let's recall the money and I'll give it
back again next year and commerce would
not stop because everything was based on
credit systems similarly in China they
invent paper money which originally
comes out of the government taking
credit instruments that people are using
and um and and adopting it themselves
that's what they do in China they
any kind of innovation first they try to
suppress it and they say ok ok we'll do
it for you so it's all privatized in the
Islamic world and it becomes public in
China actually they're they're very
opposite principles but in Islam in
particular in this period you get the
first real free-market ideology and this
is a fascinating thing I mean a lot of
people be very annoyed to learn this but
Adam Smith actually got most of his best
ideas and best lines from medieval Islam
like the pin factories actually comes
from Imam al-ghazali and 11-hundred the
out of needle Factory
ok they come and it's made possible by
what by Sharia because Sharia is civil
law that operates outside the purview of
the state and as a result you can have
markets and since they get rid of usury
does the other thing that happens
instead of debt cancellation which has
continued in China but in other places
they instead just get rid of interest
taking its illegal debt peonage becomes
illegal and um so in Islam since they
don't have that they can have these
markets that operate completely outside
of the purview of the state you can
write a check in Mali and cash it in
Indonesia there's all civil courts that
take care of it so it's the first time
you really get an idea that markets run
by themselves and don't really need
governments but you know since they are
are you know have a real free market
which isn't enforced by the state they
don't assume it's all about competition
that's like a minor element the
assumption is that it's all really an
extension of mutual aid all right so so
be this as it may you get that world of
the Middle Ages which looks surprisingly
good you know slavery largely disappears
I mean it's kind of rough in Western
Europe but Western Europe is kind of a
barbarian backwater anyway alright so
what happens around 1450 it starts to go
bad fit for bite um 1492 you got the
America all this gold and silver coming
in from America as you go back to gold
and silver currency slavery comes back
in a big way standing armies and giant
empires come back in a big way and
that's the period that's ending now 1971
is the date that most people sat for
when we go off the gold standard and
Nixon takes a dollar of the gold
standard is the sort of key point of
transition and in very rapidly after
that you see a whole series of changes
of course we get credit cards which are
hardly anybody is using in 71 very
quickly taking over so that you have
cashless transactions become the rule
we're gonna generation or two you have
financialization of capital you know
most profits from American companies no
longer come from making or selling
anything but largely from financial
speculation you have credits gonna save
the world you know
microcredit will save the third world
401ks and mortgages you know all that
stuff that blows up in 2008 and the
question is why and why it seems to have
gone so horribly wrong because we have a
series of terrible debt crises these
were superb world debt crisis now the
debt crisis that's hitting everybody
other than the third world right now
have happened ever since and the reason
I would say is because in a way we're
doing things backwards if we do look at
this in broad historical perspective
what we learn is that whenever you have
a system of virtual money where people
don't assume don't assume that money is
a thing but assume it's a promise it's
an IOU it's a social arrangement such as
in ancient Mesopotamia I have such as in
the Middle Ages well you have to set up
some sort of mechanism to make sure the
thing doesn't go crazy usually that
means or variably that means setting up
some mechanism to protect debtors so you
can have periodic debt cancellation you
can have anti usury laws where interest
taking is banned entirely and instead
you have profit sharing there's a number
of things you can do usually it's some
giant overarching cosmological system
beyond the purview of any state whether
it's sacred kings or biblical prophets
or the world religions canon law Sharia
BMS it may it has to be something big
now we do set up giant overarching
institutions like that nowadays but what
do we do we set up the IMF to protect
creditors against debtors basically we
did it backwards
you know S&P all these other
institutions like that they come up with
this idea that nobody should ever
default
and sure enough you know we have endless
series of debt crises in fact I like to
say I mean I'm being provocative which
is often I like to say that you know the
idea that people had in most of world
history of the worst case scenario is
everybody falls so deeply into debt that
they start having to sell themselves
into slavery you know it's like
nightmare scenario this is what we
always want to prevent and that's why we
have all these laws well you know if
Aristotle were here today he would
probably think that the distinction
between being so indebted that you are
selling yourself to work for others all
day long 12 hours a day or you know
being so de indebted that you are
renting yourself to work for others all
day long 12 hours a day you know as
something of a legalistic distinction
you think this is it this is the
nightmare debt trap and most people in
the world are falling into it but you
know if you look at this in broad
historical terms you'll also see that 30
years or 40 years is nothing we're
talking about 500 year cycles here um
and people are beginning to wake up to
this um yeah we still have time to get
it right and I think the social
movements that are coming out since 2008
around issues of debt are precisely
recognizing that if we're moving into a
period of virtual money money is just a
promise that we make to each other it's
just a set of IOUs and social
arraignments arrangements well those can
always be a rearrange make a promise to
someone circumstances change you
negotiate and so even the big players
always do that with each other as we've
discovered in 2008 when you know
trillions of dollars of debt was made to
disappear by the waving of various types
of magical wands so you know I think
what people are saying is if democracy
is to mean anything now it means that
everybody gets to weigh in on what sort
of promises are made what sort of
promises are captain when circumstance
has changed what sort of renegotiated
and I think that's the the political
moment that we're in right now